# CWA 2025 - 001

## Reasoning
Cosmwasm released a patch for the wasmvm library to be applied to.

## Upgrade Details 

- Chain upgrade point: at height `TBD`, `February 6th 2025, TBD UTC` (approximately);
- Go version: `v1.22`
- Release: https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5

This document describes the steps for validators and full node operators, to upgrade successfully to the Bitsong v0.20.5 release. For more details on the release, please see the [release notes](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5).

## Upgrade date

The upgrade will take place approximately on February 4th at `TBD UTC` at height `TBD `;

## Chain-id will remain the same

The chain-id of the network will remain the same, `bitsong-2b`. This is because an in-place migration of state will take place, i.e., this upgrade does not export any state.

<!-- ### System requirement

- 64GB RAM is recommended to ensure a smooth upgrade.

If you have less than 64GB RAM, you might try creating a swapfile to swap an idle program onto the hard disk to free up memory. This can allow your machine to run the binary than it could run in RAM alone.

```shell
sudo fallocate -l 64G /swapfile
sudo chmod 600 /swapfile
sudo mkswap /swapfile
sudo swapon /swapfile
```

- Make sure you have enough disk space for upgrade, the state can grow twice durng upgrade. -->

### Backups

Prior to the upgrade, validators are encouraged to take a full data snapshot. Snapshotting depends heavily on infrastructure, but generally this can be done by backing up the `.bitsongd` directory.
If you use Cosmovisor to upgrade, by default, Cosmovisor will backup your data upon upgrade. See below [upgrade using cosmovisor](#method-ii-upgrade-using-cosmovisor) section.

It is critically important for validator operators to back-up the `.bitsongd/data/priv_validator_state.json` file after stopping the bitsongd process. This file is updated every block as your validator participates in consensus rounds. It is a critical file needed to prevent double-signing, in case the upgrade fails and the previous chain needs to be restarted.

### Current runtime

The Bitsong mainnet network, `bitsong-2b`, is currently running [Go-Bitsong v0.20.4](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.4). We anticipate that operators who are running on v0.20.4, will be able to upgrade successfully. Validators are expected to ensure that their systems are up-to-date and capable of performing the upgrade. This includes running the correct binary, or if building from source, building with go `1.22`.

### Target runtime

The Bitsong mainnet network, `bitsong-2b`, will run [Bitsong v0.20.5](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5). Operators _**MUST**_ use this version post-upgrade to remain connected to the network.

## Upgrade steps

There are 2 major ways to upgrade a node:

- Manual upgrade
- Upgrade using [Cosmovisor](https://pkg.go.dev/cosmossdk.io/tools/cosmovisor)
    - Either by manually preparing the new binary
    - Or by using the auto-download functionality (this is not yet recommended)

If you prefer to use Cosmovisor to upgrade, some preparation work is needed before upgrade.

## Create the updated Bitsong binary of v0.20.5

### Go to bitsong directory if present else clone the repository

```shell
   git clone https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong.git
```

### Follow these steps if bitsong repo already present

```shell
   cd $HOME/go-bitsong
   git pull
   git fetch --tags
   git checkout v0.20.5
   make install
```

### Check the new bitsong version, verify the latest commit hash
```shell
   $ bitsongd version --long
    commit: TBD
    cosmos_sdk_version: v0.47.16-bitsong
    go: go version go1.22.11 darwin/arm64
    name: bitsong
    server_name: bitsongd
    version: 0.20.5
```

### Or check checksum of the binary if you decided to [download it](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5)

```shell
$ shasum -a 256 bitsongd-linux-amd64
TBD  bitsongd-linux-amd64
```


### Make sure you are using the proper version of libwasm

You can check the version you are currently using by running the following command:
```
$ bitsongd q wasm libwasmvm-version

1.5.8
```
The proper version is `1.5.8`.

**If the version on your machine is different you MUST change it immediately!**

#### Ways to change libwasmvm

- Use a statically built Bitsongd binary from an official Bitsong release: [https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5)
- If you built Bitsong binary by yourself, `libwasmvm` should be loaded dynamically in your binary and somehow, the wrong `libwasmvm` library was present on your machine. You can change it by downloading the proper one and linking it to the Bitsong binary manually:
1. download a proper version of `libwasmvm`:

```
$ wget https://github.com/CosmWasm/wasmvm/releases/download/v1.5.8/libwasmvm.x86_64.so
```

2. tell the linker where to find it:
```
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/lib/
```

3. check that libwasmvm version is correct:
```
$ bitsongd q wasm libwasmvm-version
2.1.5
```

### Method I: Manual Upgrade
1) Set halt height to 20340500		
You can do it manually by editing app.toml: `~/.bitsongd/config/app.toml -> halt-height = TBD`
2) Restart your node to apply configuration changes. 		
3) Make sure your systemd file is set to restart=no otherwise the node will not stop		
4) Wait for block TBD, at which the chain will stop		
5) Build the tag v0.20.4 		
6) Remove the halt height from configuration		
7) Restart the node		
<!-- 
Make sure Bitsong v0.20.5 is installed by either downloading a [compatible binary](https://github.com/bitsong-official/go-bitsong/releases/tag/v0.20.5), or building from source. Building from source requires **Golang 1.22.x**.

Run Bitsong v0.20.4 till upgrade height, the node will panic:

```shell
ERR UPGRADE "v0.20.5" NEEDED at height: TBD: upgrade to v0.20.5 and applying upgrade "v0.20.5" at height: 19660000
``` -->

<!-- Stop the node, and switch the binary to **Bitsong v0.20.5** and re-start by `bitsongd start`. -->

It may take several minutes to a few hours until validators with a total sum voting power > 2/3 to complete their node upgrades. After that, the chain can continue to produce blocks.

<!-- ### Method II: Upgrade using Cosmovisor

### Manually preparing the binary

##### Preparation

Install the latest version of Cosmovisor (`1.5.0`):

```shell
go install cosmossdk.io/tools/cosmovisor/cmd/cosmovisor@v1.5.0
```

**Verify Cosmovisor Version**

```shell
cosmovisor version
cosmovisor version: v1.5.0
```

Create a cosmovisor folder:

create a Cosmovisor folder inside `$NEUTRON_HOME` and move Bitsong v0.20.4 into `$NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/genesis/bin`

```shell
mkdir -p $NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
cp $(which bitsongd) $NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/genesis/bin
```

build **Bitsong v0.20.5**, and move bitsongd v0.20.5 to `$NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/upgrades/v0.20.5/bin`

```shell
mkdir -p  $NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/upgrades/v0.20.5/bin
cp $(which bitsongd) $NEUTRON_HOME/cosmovisor/upgrades/v0.20.5/bin
```

Then you should get the following structure:

```shell
.
├── current -> genesis or upgrades/<name>
├── genesis
│   └── bin
│       └── bitsongd  #v0.20.4
└── upgrades
    └── v0.20.5
        └── bin
            └── bitsongd  #v0.20.5
```

Export the environmental variables:

```shell
export DAEMON_NAME=bitsongd
# please change to your own bitsong home dir
# please note `DAEMON_HOME` has to be absolute path
export DAEMON_HOME=$NEUTRON_HOME
export DAEMON_RESTART_AFTER_UPGRADE=true
```

Start the node:

```shell
cosmovisor run  start --x-crisis-skip-assert-invariants --home $DAEMON_HOME
```

Skipping the invariant checks is strongly encouraged since it decreases the upgrade time significantly and since there are some other improvements coming to the crisis module in the next release of the Cosmos SDK. -->

#### Expected upgrade result

When the halt block height is reached, Bitsong will panic and stop.
<!-- When the upgrade block height is reached, Bitsong will panic and stop. -->

After upgrade, the chain will continue to produce blocks when validators with a total sum voting power > 2/3 complete their node upgrades.

## Upgrade duration

Most likely it takes around 20 minutes, given that all nodes will stop at halt time, and we mind need to wait for larger validators to come back online..

## Rollback plan

During the network upgrade, core Bitsong team will be keeping an ever vigilant eye and communicating with operators on the status of their upgrades. During this time, the core team will listen to operator needs to determine if the upgrade is experiencing unintended challenges. In the event of unexpected challenges, the core team, after conferring with operators and attaining social consensus, may choose to declare that the upgrade will be skipped.

Steps to skip this upgrade proposal are simply to resume the bitsong-2b network with the (downgraded) v0.20.4 binary using the following command:

> bitsongd start --unsafe-skip-upgrade TBD

Note: There is no particular need to restore a state snapshot prior to the upgrade height, unless specifically directed by core Bitsong team.

Important: A social consensus decision to skip the upgrade will be based solely on technical merits, thereby respecting and maintaining the decentralized governance process of the upgrade proposal's successful YES vote.

## Communications

Operators are encouraged to join the `#validator-chat` [channel](https://discord.gg/QDNek3xxTz) in the `HUB VALIDATOR` section of the Bitsong Discord. This channel is the primary communication tool for operators to ask questions, report upgrade status, report technical issues, and to build social consensus should the need arise. This channel is restricted to known operators and requires verification beforehand. Request to join the `#validator-chat` channel by opening a ticket or asking in the `general` channel.

## Risks

As a validator performing the upgrade procedure on your consensus nodes carries a heightened risk of double-signing and being slashed. The most important piece of this procedure is verifying your software version and genesis file hash before starting your validator and signing.

The riskiest thing a validator can do is discover that they made a mistake and repeat the upgrade procedure again during the network startup. If you discover a mistake in the process, the best thing to do is wait for the network to start before correcting it.

## FAQ

1. Q: My node restarted in the middle of upgrade process (OOM killed, hardware issues, etc), is it safe to just proceed with the upgrade

   A: No. Most likely the upgrade will be completed successfully. But you get AppHash error after the network gets up. It's a lot safer to restart full process from scratch(recover the node from a backup).

   To perform an upgrade you need to keep your `./data/priv_validator_state.json` file when you are applying a snapshot from the backup.
   This will help you avoid the risk of slashing due to double signing.