## After The Upgrade Report 

## What Happened?

### Last minute version release 

About 1-2 hours before the expected upgrade block was reached, a newer version of go-bitsong was released. 
This newer version updated the upgrade handler so it would only remove the delegations from the distribution and staking keepers stores that had 0 shares (these existed due to bug from v018). 

This last minute version release introduced problems as node operators who automate the upgrade process using cosmovisors had already staged cosmovisor to use v0.21.0, as this was what was communicated from the upgrade proposal plan details. 

Since these two versions resulted in different application states after running the upgrade handler, any nodes who automated and upgraded using v0.21.0 were expected to have conflicting app-hashes with nodes using v0.21.1

### `panic: validator not found`

For nodes that did manage to prepare v0.21.1 prior to reaching the upgrade height, when the upgradeHandler logic was run, thier nodes paniced commmunicating this error: `panic: validator not found`. 

This occured due to logic that validated **after** the upgradeHandler applied the patch removing stale data from the store. First, it retrieved all delegation information from the Staking keeper store. Then, it attempted to define the validator interface given   the validator operator address that existed in each delegation information. 

To resolve this issue, this validation logic was  updated to first fetch all validators from the store, and then for each delegation a validator has, we checked the rewards state from the distribution store, ensuring that we resolved the invariant issue with the distribution store, allowing us to successfully revert back upstream to an unforked cosmos-sdk version.

### Getting Consensus 

Once v0.21.2 was released, validators that ran into the panic above were asked to downgrade, rollback, and install the latest version to re-run the upgrade handler logic with the newer version. 

Certain validators that did not upgrade to v0.21.1 prior to reaching the upgradehandler did not experience the panic, and were able to finalize the upgrade block and began  waiting for precommits on the next block. Due to this edge case, we asked validators that did not experience the panic to not rollback, but instead wait until consensus was reached and to resync to avoid the risk of double signatures.

### GRPC 
Once enough validators with the correct version were updated and consensus was reached, some of the node operators noticed that API function were not implemented. A patch has been released for non validator nodes to resolve this, and is not consensus breaking.

### Wasm Data
Due to the nature of the upgrade to cosmos-sdk v050, the wasm data existing in each nodes home folder needs to be moved to the correct path for the wasmVm to have access.
